Now we're turning our focus towards the different types of encryption.
Let's begin with symmetric.
Symmetric encryption uses only one key, in this case,
a private or secret key to both encrypt and decrypt the data.
The key can be in the form of a passcode or a series of
randomized letters and numbers from a random number generator or RNG.
There are two types of symmetric encryption algorithms.
Block algorithms in which set length
a bits are encrypted with the use of a specific secret key.
As the data is being encrypted,
the system holds the data in memory as it waits for the block to complete.
The second type of symmetric encryption algorithm is stream algorithms.
Here, the data is encrypted as it streams and is not retained in system memory.
Here are a few examples of symmetric encryption.
First up is Advanced Encryption Standard or AES.
It was designed around the start of this century to replace DES.
If you recall from just a moment ago,
it uses blocked algorithms.
It's block size is 128 bits.
However, AES performs its actions in 16 bytes.
If you recall, a byte equals eight bits.
Each block the algorithm processes is four columns of four bytes.
AES uses rounds of encryption in that it adds
a key to the initial block of data using the XOR cipher,
which is an additive algorithm.
From there, it substitutes bytes with a predetermined table,
shifts the rows one step to the left,
and then mixes columns.
In layman's terms, this means it performs three different types of shuffling to the data.
This is one round.
AES has key sizes of 128,
192, or 256 bits.
With 128, there are nine of those rounds.
With 192, there are 11,
and 256 has 13 of these.
As you can see,
this is quite complicated.
AES-256, which you remember from our wireless lesson, is very secure.
There are links to additional reading in the classroom.
Next up, we have Twofish encryption.
It has several similarities with AES,
such as 128 bit block that it also processes as 16 bytes.
It has the same key sizes of 128,
192, and 256 bits.
It also uses the XOR algorithm.
Where it differs with AES,
is in the manner of how it shuffles the data.
It performs 16 rounds of this shuffling regardless of key size.
The third and final symmetric encryption example we're going to learn
about is Rivest Cipher 4 or RC4.
RC4 differs from AES and Twofish in that it is a stream cipher encryption.
It has a key size of 40-256 bits,
it encrypts by creating a table of
256 elements and using an internal variable length key,
which converts that into a pseudo random stream of
information that has then blended with the plaintext data.
RC4 is primarily retired.
It hasn't been officially broken on its own,
but has shown to be broken when used with TLS,
Transport Layer Security, which we'll discuss later.
Let's look at some strengths and weaknesses of symmetric encryption.
Symmetric encryption is much faster than
asymmetric in that there's no waiting on a public key exchange.
Because each party must have the key outside of the data exchange process,
the data can be sent over any link regardless of security,
thus making data transfer very secure.
Let's look at a couple weaknesses.
Key transportation is probably the most difficult hurdle.
The only truly secure way to exchange symmetric keys is personally.
Once the key has been exchanged,
there is no true way to verify the identity of the other party.